And that is also the theme for this month's program.
Keep conquering the evil with the good.
This challenging exhortation was written by the Apostle Paul at Romans 12-21.
It's challenging because we live in a world that is alienated from God and the truth,
a world that tries to squeeze everyone into its mold.
Isaiah 5-20 shows how the world has changed God-given standards.
It reads,
Wall to those who say that good is bad and bad is good.
Those who substitute darkness for light and light for darkness.
Those who put bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter.
By adhering to the standard of healthful words in the Scriptures
and to the examples of faithful servants of the past,
we can conquer the evil with the good.
The faithful man, Inak, was born when Adam was about 600 years old,
which means that Inak and Adam were contemporaries for about 300 years.
However, there is no record of any contact between them during that period of time.
The Scriptures indicate that violence and hate for God were widespread in that pre-flood world.
Many centuries later, the disciple Jude describes the fear-inspiring prophecy
that God gave to Inak about Jehovah coming with his holy myriads,
legions of mighty angels in battle array to bring destruction to all the ungodly.
Inak fearlessly went about declaring the coming judgment and destruction
and what is more, he did it alone.
The prophecy was fulfilled in the global deluge,
and it set the pattern of a greater destruction yet to come.
No wonder that Genesis 524 tells us that Inak kept walking with the true God.
Inak's example gives us courage to remain firm for true worship,
even if family and friends stand apart from us.
Inak did not try to fit in with the evil crowd of the pre-flood world,
and we don't want to fit in with the present dying world and its evil ways.
We may feel alone at times, but we are reminded that Jehovah never abandoned Inak,
and neither will he abandon his faithful servants today.
We imitate Inak by not allowing the evil surrounding us to undermine our faith in Jehovah.
Like Inak, we can conquer the evil with the good by avoiding bad associations,
sticking close to Jehovah God on the earthly part of his organization,
and boldly proclaiming the good news.
Elisha the Prophet refused to engage in paying evil for evil,
even when it seemed justified.
The account is found at 2nd Kings, chapter 6, verses 14 to 23.
Syria was at war with Israel.
The King of Syria was enraged because Elisha was able to foresee wherever it was
that Syria was planning to ambush the Israelites.
Elisha would warn the King of Israel,
and he in turn would keep his troops away from the place of ambush.
The King of Syria became exasperated and wanted desperately to take the Prophet Elisha captive,
to stop him from warning the King of Israel.
It came about that the King of Syria learned that Elisha was in the city of Dothan.
So the King sent horses, war chariots, as well as a large army to surround Dothan by night
in order to take Elisha captive.
The following morning, Jehovah listened to Elisha and did something amazing.
He struck the Syrian troops with the temporary form of blindness,
and Elisha guided all those troops, not back to Syria,
but to Samaria where the King of Israel resided.
The King of Israel was anxious to strike down and kill the Syrian troops,
but Elisha said to him, as recorded in verses 22 and 23 of Second Kings, chapter 6.
You must not strike them down.
Do you strike down those whom you have taken captive with your sword and with your bow?
Give them bread and water so they may eat and drink and return to their Lord.
So he spread a great feast for them, and they ate and drank,
after which he sent them away to return to their Lord.
What a shock this must have been to the Syrian soldiers who likely thought that they were as good as dead.
This astounding turn of events was far better than paying evil for evil.
How do we know it was better?
The latter part of verse 23 says,
and not once did the marauder bands of the Syrians come again into the land of Israel.
Can you imagine the men of the Syrian army relating to their King what had taken place?
They went out to take Elisha captive.
However, Elisha, with the help of Jehovah Spirit, had taken the Syrians captive without a battle.
The Syrian King must have been dumbfounded when he heard the report,
and you can be sure that the soldiers of the Syrian army were not only grateful,
but they acquired a very respectful fear of Jehovah and of his prophet Elisha.
The good done to the Syrians would not be soon forgotten.
Like Elisha, we want to do what is good for people,
including those who do not view us favorably.
When tragedies such as fires, floods, earthquakes, and hurricanes strike,
we go out of our way to comfort people with the Scriptures.
Also, Jehovah's Witnesses serving as relief workers are well known for the practical assistance
they render to fellow believers and to others.
As a result, many people have changed their view of us
and have come to appreciate that in these last days,
Jehovah does indeed have a people for his name on the earth.
At 2 Timothy 2 verses 23 through 25,
the Apostle Paul encourages us to display qualities that make us different from the world.
He says, further, reject foolish and ignorant debates,
knowing that they produce fights.
For a slave of the Lord does not need to fight,
but needs to be gentle toward all, qualified to teach,
showing restraint when wronged, instructing with mildness,
those not favorably disposed.
And then Paul explains the desired result.
Perhaps God may give them repentance leading to an accurate knowledge of truth.
Paul was gentle toward all and qualified to teach.
He showed restraint when he was imprisoned by the Roman authorities around 60 or 61 CE.
He spent about two years under house arrest in Rome,
perhaps even being chained to a guard.
He had done nothing to merit imprisonment.
However, he did not dwell on the evil done to him,
and he did not allow it to make him bitter and resentful of Roman authorities.
Rather, in Philippians chapter 1 verses 12 through 14, Paul wrote,
Now I want you to know, brothers, that my situation has actually turned out for the advancement of the good news,
so that my prison bonds for the sake of Christ have become public knowledge among all the Praetorian guard and all the rest.
Now, most of the brothers in the Lord have gained confidence because of my prison bonds,
and they are showing all the more courage to speak the word of God fearlessly.
In his letter to Titus at chapter 3 verses 1 and 2,
Paul gives reminders on how Christians today can conquer the evil with the good
by showing proper respect for governmental authorities wherever we may live.
He writes,
Continue reminding them, fellow Christians, to be in subjection,
and to be obedient to governments and authorities,
to be ready for every good work,
to speak injuriously of no one,
not to be quarrelsome, but to be reasonable, displaying all mildness toward all men.
Paul followed his own advice.
While in custody and Rome,
Paul wrote inspired letters to Christian congregations in Greece and Asia Minor,
and we today benefit from the council in those letters.
Never do we read in his letters criticism aimed at human rulers
or encouragement for Christians to favor one political figure or party over another.
He was no part of the world,
and he knew that man's only hope was the kingdom of God.
Paul was a spiritual man,
and he conquered the evil with the good
by following Jesus' instructions at Mark 12-17,
of giving Caesar's things to Caesar,
but God's things to God,
all the while displaying a mildness that belongs to wisdom.
At first Peter, 221,
we receive further direction about the course that we are to follow.
Peter writes,
in fact, to this course you were called,
because even Christ suffered for you,
leaving a model for you to follow his steps closely.
Some of Christ's steps are enumerated in verses 22 and 23,
where it reads,
he, Jesus, committed no sin,
nor was deception found in his mouth.
When he was being insulted,
he did not insult and return.
When he was suffering,
he did not threaten,
but he entrusted himself to the one who judges righteously.
Jehovah is the one who judges righteously.
However, the Jewish religious leaders did not judge the Christ righteously.
They insulted Jesus frequently
and even accused him of having a demon.
Jesus did not stoop to return evil for evil,
hurling insults or threatening people.
Insults and threats do not open hearts to accept the good news.
When Jesus was on trial,
the Jewish religious leaders spurred the crowd on to cry out for his execution.
The Roman authorities had Jesus nailed to a torture stake
to suffer a cruel and excruciating death.
While suffering on the torture stake,
what did Jesus speak about?
Did he curse the Roman soldiers who had mistreated him
and were now executing him?
Through the contrary, he conquered the evil with the good.
Among Jesus' last words are those recorded at Luke 2334.
Father, forgive them,
for they do not know what they are doing.
Jesus knew that the Roman soldiers were ignorant of who he really was
and did not know what they were doing.
He could forgive them with the hope
that they would eventually respond to the truth
and become his disciples.
In every respect,
Jesus conquered the evil with the good
and he always displayed complete confidence
in the one who judges righteously, Jehovah God.
We want to demonstrate the same kind of confidence in Jehovah
and in His Word that Jesus displayed.
We do our best to imitate the Christ
by applying the Spirit-inspired counsel at Romans 12 verses 17 and 18.
Return evil for evil to no one.
Take into consideration what is fine
from the viewpoint of all men.
If possible, as far as it depends on you,
be peaceable with all men.
Heating this counsel is particularly important in homes
that are religiously divided.
The Christian maid resists the temptation
to repay an unkind word or act with another unkindness.
Really, no good comes from returning evil for evil.
On the contrary, such an attitude can only aggravate the situation.
In the domestic setting,
a wife who shows genuine kindness to her husband
after he makes unpleasant comments about her beliefs
may well diffuse a potentially explosive situation.
At Proverbs 31-12, we are told
how a capable God-fearing wife deals with her husband.
She rewards him with good,
not bad, all the days of her life.
Additionally, by taking into consideration
what is fine from the viewpoint of all men,
Jehovah's people have often overcome prejudice
by providing practical assistance to their neighbors
as opportunity affords,
and particularly when a disaster strikes.
We conscientiously adhere to Romans 12-19,
which states,
do not avenge yourselves beloved,
but yield place to the wrath for it is written.
Vengeance is mine.
I will repay, says Jehovah.
The footnote on verse 19 shows
that Paul is telling us to yield to God's wrath or anger.
Jehovah is the one who will set matters straight,
and he will do it much better than we ever could.
As James 1-20 states,
man's anger does not bring about God's righteousness.
The theme of this discussion is summarized
exquisitely at Romans 12-20 and 21,
with this direction to all of Jehovah's people.
But if your enemy is hungry, feed him.
If he is thirsty,
give him something to drink.
For by doing this,
you will heap fiery coals on his head.
Do not let yourself be conquered by the evil,
but keep conquering the evil with the good.